---
title: Recursive Enumerable Languages
description: "Recursive Enumerable Languages, REL, Non halting turing machine."
nav_order: 3
child_of: Turing Machine
mathjax: true
sub: true
---

- RE languages of type-0 languages are generated by type-0 grammars.
- An RE language can be accepted by TM, 
    - i.e. **TM machine will enter into final state for string of REL and TM may or may not enter into final state for string which are not in REL.**
    - It means TM can loop forever for string which are not part of the REL.
- A halting TM is similar to the algorithm (which also never goes into infinite loop).
- **REs are undecidable.**
- REs **also known as partially decidable languages.**
    - We call it partial, because we can answer some questions.
    - For example, we can say if the DFA generae empty language or not.
    - But we can't say if the grammar is unambiguous or not.
- REs **also known as Turing recognizable languages.**
    -  A recognizer of a language is a machine that recognizes that language.
    - A Recogizer MAY or MAY NOT halt on strings that are not in the language
- **Recursive languges are subclass of recursive enumerable languages.**


# Example

- Let's say, we want to find if the grammar is ambiguous.
- To do so; we can follow the following steps.
    1. Create a string representing the grammar.
    2. Pass that string in TM.
    3. TM will detect (abviously we have to implement the logic) if the grammar have multiple parse trees for a same string.
        - If yes; then TM will say true.
        - If no; TM will go into infinite loop, because there are infinite strings to check for ambiguity.
    
