---
title: Pumping Lemma
description: "Mealy and Moore Machines."
nav_order: 11
child_of: Finite Automata
mathjax: true
---

- **Pumping lemma is used to prove that the certain sets are NOT regular sets.**
    - If language is regular, it will satisfy the pumping lemma.

Note that different languages have different pumping lemmas, i.e. RL and CFL have different pumping lemmas.
{: .note}

- If there exists at least one string generated from pumping which is not in L, then L is surely not regular.
- The opposite of above statement is not true, i.e if the string made from pumping is in L, then we can't guarantee that the L is regular.

**Note:** we only try to prove infinite languages an non-regular here; becuase all the finite languages are regular.
{: .note}

# Notion

- If we want to prove that the language is non regular, we first assume it is a regular.
- After that we try to apply some properties of regular language which the language will not satisfy.
- An that is how we prove that the language is not regular.

# Pigeonhole Principal

- If these are n pigeonholes and m pigeons where m > n.
- Then at least one peigonhole will contain more than one pigeons.

## Use In Pumping Lemma

- If we have the string from language of size larger than the number of states, a loop must exist in automata.
- All the strings generated by that loop must be in the language (if the language is reglular) else the language is non-regular.

# Lemma

- For every regular langugage there exists an integer n (pumping length), such that for all z ∈ L with \|z\| >= n, there exists u, v, w ∈ ∑<sup>*</sup>, such that z = uvw, and
    - \|uv\| <= n
        - This means uv can cover whole string.
    - \|v\| > 0
        - This means length of v can't be 0. This is because we have to take power of it.
    - For all i >= 0, u v<sup>i</sup> w
- In simple terms, if we pump (inserting any number of times) v in z, the new string also will be in L.

# To Prove Language is Non_Regular

1. Assume that the language *L* is regular.
2. There exist FA for *L* with *n* number of states.
3. Select string *w* from *L* such that *|w| > n*.
4. Then Divide the string such that *uvw*
    - \|uv\| <= n
    - \|v\| > 0
    - We have to take *v* such that it will have string part having loop. This may be a single symbol or a substring.
5. Now try to repeate the *v* for infinite number of times, the string should belong tto the *L*; it it doesn't then the language is non regular.
    - I.e. Pump v in to the string $uv^iw$ for at least one $i$ value.

**Note:** We have to check for all loops in the language to prove language is non-regular. If we get one such string which doesn't belong to the language; then langauge is non-regular.Example in language $\\{a^nb^nc^*\\}$ if we only check loop of c; then we get language is regular (which is not true), we have to check loops of a's and b's also.
{: .note}



# Example

- Suppose we want to check is the language L is regular or not.
- Let's take any string in L
    - $z = a^kb^k, k > 0$ 
- Assume *z* is regular.
- If it's regular; there must a FA with n states.
- Divide z in three parts u, v, q
    - $u = a^{k-1}$
    - $v = a^k$
    - $w = b^k$
- Constraints on u, v, w
    

- Now if the L is regular, then the string $uv^iw$ should belong to the L for any value of $i$.